OBSDOCS-310: Monitoring-4.14-RN-new-features (#64732)
openshift/openshift-docs: release_notes/ocp-4-14-release-notes.adoc

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring"]
=== Monitoring

The monitoring stack for this release includes the following new and modified features.

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-updates-to-monitoring-stack-components-and-dependencies"]
==== Updates to monitoring stack components and dependencies
This release includes the following version updates for monitoring stack components and dependencies:

* kube-state-metrics to 2.9.2
* node-exporter to 1.6.1
* prom-label-proxy to 0.7.0
* Prometheus to 2.46.0
* prometheus-operator to 0.67.1

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-changes-to-alerting-rules"]
==== Changes to alerting rules

[NOTE]
====
Red Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for recording rules or alerting rules.
====

* *New*
** Added the `NodeSystemSaturation` alert to monitor resource saturation on a node.
** Added the `NodeSystemdServiceFailed` alert to monitor the systemd service on a node.
** Added the `NodeMemoryMajorPagesFaults` alert to monitor major page faults on a node.

> ** Added the `PrometheusSDRefreshFailure` alert to monitor failed Prometheus service discoveries.

Reviewer: KubeDeploymentRolloutStuck is added since 4.14,
https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/release-4.14/assets/control-plane/prometheus-rule.yaml#L53
no such alert in 4.13
https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/release-4.13/assets/control-plane/prometheus-rule.yaml

Author: @jan--f - Should we mention dropped alerts? I don't think we've done so in the past, but I think it might be good to let users know what has been dropped. WDYT?

Author: Added `KubeDeploymentRolloutStuck` to the list

Author: If it was not an alert that would fire in a customer cluster, it's safe to leave it out here, I think.

* *Changed*
** Modified the `KubeAggregatedAPIDown` alert and the `KubeAggregatedAPIErrors` alert to evaluate only metrics from the `apiserver` job.
** Modified the `KubeCPUOvercommit` alert to evaluate only metrics from the `kube-state-metrics` job.
** Modified the `NodeHighNumberConntrackEntriesUsed`, `NodeNetworkReceiveErrs` and `NodeNetworkTransmitErrs` alerts to evaluate only metrics from the `node-exporter` job.

> 

Reviewer: MultipleContainersOOMKilled is removed from 4.14, see:
https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/release-4.13/assets/cluster-monitoring-operator/prometheus-rule.yaml
https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/release-4.14/assets/cluster-monitoring-operator/prometheus-rule.yaml

Author: @jan--f Same question as above re dropped alerts

Reviewer 2: This one is probably worth mentioning. We removed this alert since it was a stop gap until the node team introduced the relevant metric for the container runtime. They have and decided that adding a OOM alert was not benefital. See https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-600. Instead they alert on available memory running out.

Author: Added `MultipleContainersOOMKilled` to the list under "Removed".

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-option-to-create-alerts-based-on-core-platform-metrics"]
==== New option to create alerts based on core platform metrics

With this release, administrators can create new alerting rules based on core platform metrics.
You can now modify settings for existing platform alerting rules by adjusting thresholds and by changing labels.
You can also define and add new custom alerting rules by constructing a query expression based on core platform metrics in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace.
This feature was included as a technology preview in a previous {product-title} release and is now generally available.
For more information, see xref:../monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#managing-core-platform-alerting-rules_managing-alerts[Managing alerting rules for core platform monitoring].

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-option-to-specify-resource-limits-for-all-monitoring-components"]
==== New option to specify resource limits for all monitoring components

With this release, you can now specify resource requests and limits for all monitoring components, including the following:

* Alertmanager
* kube-state-metrics
* node-exporter
* openshift-state-metrics

> * Prometheus

Reviewer: missed prometheus-adapter and monitoring-plugin also support the resources setting
https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/release-4.14/pkg/manifests/types.go#L688-L697

Author: Added Prometheus Adapter and monitoring-plugin to the list

* Prometheus Operator and its Admission webhook
* Telemeter Client
* Thanos Querier
* Thanos Ruler

In previous versions of {product-title}, you could only set options for Prometheus, Alertmanager, Thanos Querier, and Thanos Ruler.

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-options-to-configure-node-exporter-collectors"]
==== New options to configure node-exporter collectors

With this release, you can customize Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) config map settings for additional node-exporter collectors.
The following node-exporter collectors are now optional, and you can enable or disable each one individually by using config map settings:

> 

Reviewer 3: We have implemented process collector, too.
https://issues.redhat.com//browse/MON-3235

Author: Added

> * `gomaxprocs` collector

Reviewer 3: `gomaxprocs` is an option to set the maximum number of processes to run Node Exporter, not a collector.

Author: Removed

> * `hwmon` collector

Reviewer 4: `hwmon` collector is not implemented
see from: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-2906

* `ksmd` collector
* `mountstats` collector

> * `ntp` collector

Reviewer 4: `ntp` collector is abandoned
see from: https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-2905

Author: Removed

In addition, you can now exclude network devices from the relevant collector configuration for the `netdev` and `netclass` collectors.

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-options-to-deploy-monitoring-web-console-plugin-resources"]
==== New option to deploy monitoring web console plugin resources

With this release, the monitoring pages in the *Observe* section of the {product-title} web console are deployed as a xref:../web_console/dynamic-plugin/overview-dynamic-plugin.adoc[dynamic plugin].

> With this change, you can now use Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) configurations to deploy certain {product-title} web console monitoring plugin resources.
> Specifically, you can use CMO settings to configure the following monitoring stack features:

Reviewer 2: CMO will deploy the monitoring plugin in all cases, the user can not configure this. They only can set the options below. So how about 
```suggestion
With this change, Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) is now the component to deploy the {product-title} web console monitoring plugin resources.
You can use CMO settings to configure the following features of the console monitoring plugin resource:
```

Author: Edited per your suggestion

> ** Added the `NodeSystemdServiceFailed` alert to monitor the systemd service on a node.
> ** Added the `NodeMemoryMajorPagesFaults` alert to monitor major page faults on a node.
> ** Added the `PrometheusSDRefreshFailure` alert to monitor failed Prometheus service discoveries.
> 
> * *Changed*
> ** Modified the `KubeAggregatedAPIDown` alert and the `KubeAggregatedAPIErrors` alert to evaluate only metrics from the `apiserver` job.
> ** Modified the `KubeCPUOvercommit` alert to evaluate only metrics from the `kube-state-metrics` job.
> ** Modified the `NodeHighNumberConntrackEntriesUsed`, `NodeNetworkReceiveErrs` and `NodeNetworkTransmitErrs` alerts to evaluate only metrics from the `node-exporter` job.
> 
> [id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-option-to-create-alerts-based-on-core-platform-metrics"]
> ==== New option to create alerts based on core platform metrics
> 
> With this release, administrators can create new alerting rules based on core platform metrics.
> You can now modify settings for existing platform alerting rules by adjusting thresholds and by changing labels.
> You can also define and add new custom alerting rules by constructing a query expression based on core platform metrics in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace.
> This feature was included as a technology preview in a previous {product-title} release and is now generally available.
> For more information, see xref:../monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#managing-core-platform-alerting-rules_managing-alerts[Managing alerting rules for core platform monitoring].
> 
> [id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-option-to-specify-resource-limits-for-all-monitoring-components"]
> ==== New option to specify resource limits for all monitoring components
> 
> With this release, you can now specify resource requests and limits for all monitoring components, including the following:
> 
> * Alertmanager
> * kube-state-metrics
> * node-exporter
> * openshift-state-metrics
> * Prometheus
> * Prometheus Operator and its Admission webhook
> * Telemeter Client
> * Thanos Querier
> * Thanos Ruler
> 
> In previous versions of {product-title}, you could only set options for Prometheus, Alertmanager, Thanos Querier, and Thanos Ruler.
> 
> [id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-options-to-configure-node-exporter-collectors"]
> ==== New options to configure node-exporter collectors
> 
> With this release, you can customize Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) config map settings for additional node-exporter collectors.
> The following node-exporter collectors are now optional, and you can enable or disable each one individually by using config map settings:
> 
> * `gomaxprocs` collector
> * `hwmon` collector
> * `ksmd` collector
> * `mountstats` collector
> * `ntp` collector
> 
> In addition, you can now exclude network devices from the relevant collector configuration for the `netdev` and `netclass` collectors.
> 
> [id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-options-to-deploy-monitoring-web-console-plugin-resources"]
> ==== New option to deploy monitoring web console plugin resources
> 
> With this release, the monitoring pages in the *Observe* section of the {product-title} web console are deployed as a xref:../web_console/dynamic-plugin/overview-dynamic-plugin.adoc[dynamic plugin].
> With this change, you can now use Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) configurations to deploy certain {product-title} web console monitoring plugin resources.
> Specifically, you can use CMO settings to configure the following monitoring stack features:
> 
> * Node tolerations
> * Topology spread constraints
> * Resource requests
> * Resource limits

Reviewer: based on https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/release-4.14/pkg/manifests/types.go#L688-L697, it is better to update to
```suggestion
* Node selectors
* Node tolerations
* Topology spread constraints
* Resource requests
* Resource limits
```

> 

Reviewer: based on https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/release-4.14/pkg/manifests/types.go#L688-L697, it is better to update to
```
* Node selectors
* Node tolerations
* Topology spread constraints
* Resource requests
* Resource limits
```

Author: Added `node selectors` to the list

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-option-to-specify-resource-limits-for-all-monitoring-components"]
==== New option to specify resource limits for all monitoring components

With this release, you can now specify resource requests and limits for all monitoring components, including the following:

* Alertmanager
* kube-state-metrics
* monitoring-plugin
* node-exporter
* openshift-state-metrics
* Prometheus
* Prometheus Adapter
* Prometheus Operator and its admission webhook service
* Telemeter Client
* Thanos Querier
* Thanos Ruler

In previous versions of {product-title}, you could only set options for Prometheus, Alertmanager, Thanos Querier, and Thanos Ruler.

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-options-to-configure-node-exporter-collectors"]
==== New options to configure node-exporter collectors

With this release, you can customize Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) config map settings for additional node-exporter collectors.
The following node-exporter collectors are now optional, and you can enable or disable each one individually by using config map settings:

* `ksmd` collector
* `mountstats` collector

> * `processes_linux` collector

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* `processes` collector
```
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3269

Author: fixed

In addition, you can now exclude network devices from the relevant collector configuration for the `netdev` and `netclass` collectors.

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-options-to-deploy-monitoring-web-console-plugin-resources"]
==== New option to deploy monitoring web console plugin resources

With this release, the monitoring pages in the *Observe* section of the {product-title} web console are deployed as a xref:../web_console/dynamic-plugin/overview-dynamic-plugin.adoc[dynamic plugin].
With this change, the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) is now the component that deploys the {product-title} web console monitoring plugin resources.
You can now use CMO settings to configure the following features of the console monitoring plugin resource:

* Node selectors

> * Node tolerations

Reviewer 5: I think the terminology is just `Tolerations` 
```suggestion
* Tolerations
```

Author: Changed per your suggestion

> * Node tolerations

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* tolerations
```
discuss with @sthaha, it's better to use `tolerations` instead of `Node Tolerations`

Author: Changed per your suggestion

* Prometheus to 2.46.0
* prometheus-operator to 0.67.1

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-changes-to-alerting-rules"]
==== Changes to alerting rules

[NOTE]
====
Red{nbsp}Hat does not guarantee backward compatibility for recording rules or alerting rules.
====

* *New*
** Added the `KubeDeploymentRolloutStuck` alert to monitor if the rollout of a deployment has not progressed for 15 minutes.
** Added the `NodeSystemSaturation` alert to monitor resource saturation on a node.
** Added the `NodeSystemdServiceFailed` alert to monitor the systemd service on a node.
** Added the `NodeMemoryMajorPagesFaults` alert to monitor major page faults on a node.
** Added the `PrometheusSDRefreshFailure` alert to monitor failed Prometheus service discoveries.

* *Changed*
** Modified the `KubeAggregatedAPIDown` alert and the `KubeAggregatedAPIErrors` alert to evaluate only metrics from the `apiserver` job.
** Modified the `KubeCPUOvercommit` alert to evaluate only metrics from the `kube-state-metrics` job.
** Modified the `NodeHighNumberConntrackEntriesUsed`, `NodeNetworkReceiveErrs` and `NodeNetworkTransmitErrs` alerts to evaluate only metrics from the `node-exporter` job.

* *Removed*

> ** Removed the `MultipleContainersOOMKilled` alert and replaced it with the `ContainersOOMKilled` alert, which uses the `container_runtime_crio_containers_oom_total` metric and notifies users if more than five containers on the host have been terminated by the out-of-memory (OOM) killer on the host.

Reviewer 6: Up to you! 
```suggestion
** Removed the `MultipleContainersOOMKilled` alert and replaced it with the `ContainersOOMKilled` alert. This uses the `container_runtime_crio_containers_oom_total` metric and notifies users if more than five containers on the host have been terminated by the out-of-memory (OOM) killer on the host.
```

Author: Leaving as-is. Adding `this` with no noun goes against ISG guidance to ensure that pronouns always have a clear reference: https://www.ibm.com/docs/en/ibm-style?topic=grammar-pronouns#ambiguous-pronoun-references

> ** Removed the `MultipleContainersOOMKilled` alert and replaced it with the `ContainersOOMKilled` alert, which uses the `container_runtime_crio_containers_oom_total` metric and notifies users if more than five containers on the host have been terminated by the out-of-memory (OOM) killer on the host.

Reviewer: `MultipleContainersOOMKilled` alert is just removed and not replaced with `ContainersOOMKilled` alert, 
```
$ oc get prometheusrules --all-namespaces -oyaml | grep -i ContainersOOMKilled
no result
```
PR: https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/pull/2071

Reviewer 2: :+1:  yes, apologies if my earlier comment was confusing. The node team considered adding a `ContainersOOMKilled` but decided against it. https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/pull/2666#discussion_r678023007 summarizes the issues with the alert. The goal is to alert on nodes being under memory pressure and we have separate alerts for that.
So maybe we should add something like "Removed the `MultipleContainersOOMKilled` alert for not being actionable. Nodes under memory pressure are covered by other alerts."

Author: Changed per Jan's suggestion

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-option-to-create-alerts-based-on-core-platform-metrics"]
==== New option to create alerts based on core platform metrics

With this release, administrators can create new alerting rules based on core platform metrics.
You can now modify settings for existing platform alerting rules by adjusting thresholds and by changing labels.

> You can also define and add new custom alerting rules by constructing a query expression based on core platform metrics in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace.

Reviewer 6: Up to you! 
```suggestion
You can also add and define new custom alerting rules by constructing a query expression based on core platform metrics in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace.
```

Author: Leaving as-is because first you define and then you add new custom rules.

> This feature was included as a technology preview in a previous {product-title} release and is now generally available.

Reviewer 6: Is it worth mentioning which version of OCP the tech preview was in? Its not necessary but I was wondering your thoughts

For more information, see xref:../monitoring/managing-alerts.adoc#managing-core-platform-alerting-rules_managing-alerts[Managing alerting rules for core platform monitoring].

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-option-to-specify-resource-limits-for-all-monitoring-components"]
==== New option to specify resource limits for all monitoring components

With this release, you can now specify resource requests and limits for all monitoring components, including the following:

* Alertmanager
* kube-state-metrics
* monitoring-plugin
* node-exporter
* openshift-state-metrics
* Prometheus
* Prometheus Adapter
* Prometheus Operator and its admission webhook service
* Telemeter Client
* Thanos Querier
* Thanos Ruler

In previous versions of {product-title}, you could only set options for Prometheus, Alertmanager, Thanos Querier, and Thanos Ruler.

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-options-to-configure-node-exporter-collectors"]
==== New options to configure node-exporter collectors

> With this release, you can customize Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) config map settings for additional node-exporter collectors.

Reviewer 6: Maybe something like, also up to you though!  
```suggestion
With this release, you can customize the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) config map settings to add additional node-exporter collectors.
```

Author: Leaving as-is. The suggested edit changes the technical meaning of the original sentence.

> The following node-exporter collectors are now optional, and you can enable or disable each one individually by using config map settings:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The following node-exporter collectors are now optional, and you can enable or disable each one individually in the config map settings:
```

Author: Changed per your suggestion, which is shorter and more direct. Thanks!

* `ksmd` collector
* `mountstats` collector

> * `processes` collector

Reviewer 2: Apologies if I forget about any prior discussion. https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-2814 also added the `systemd` collector. cc @raptorsun

Author: Added

Reviewer: gomaxprocs setting of Node Exporter also in 4.14
https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-2894
@Tai-RedHat please double check if there is something missed

With this release, you can now specify resource requests and limits for all monitoring components, including the following:

* Alertmanager
* kube-state-metrics
* monitoring-plugin
* node-exporter
* openshift-state-metrics
* Prometheus
* Prometheus Adapter
* Prometheus Operator and its admission webhook service
* Telemeter Client
* Thanos Querier
* Thanos Ruler

In previous versions of {product-title}, you could only set options for Prometheus, Alertmanager, Thanos Querier, and Thanos Ruler.

[id="ocp-4-14-monitoring-new-options-to-configure-node-exporter-collectors"]
==== New options to configure node-exporter collectors

With this release, you can customize Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO) config map settings for additional node-exporter collectors.
The following node-exporter collectors are now optional, and you can enable or disable each one individually in the config map settings:

* `ksmd` collector
* `mountstats` collector
* `processes` collector
* `systemd` collector

In addition, you can now exclude network devices from the relevant collector configuration for the `netdev` and `netclass` collectors.

> You can also now use the `gomaxprocs` option to set the maximum number of processes that can run node-exporter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also now use the `maxProcs` option to set the maximum number of processes that can run node-exporter.
```
given the setting, I think `maxProcs` is better, let @raptorsun decide
```
 config.yaml: |
    nodeExporter: 
      maxProcs: 1
```

Reviewer 3: I would use `maxProcs` here as @juzhao suggested.

Author: changed
